---
layout: post
title:  "Learning local neighborhoods of non-Gaussian graphical models"
date:   2025-04-11 00:00:00 +00:00
image: images/NG_graphical_model10.png
categories: research
authors: "<strong>Sarah Liaw</strong>, Rebecca Morrison, Youssef Marzouk, Ricardo Baptista"
bibtex: |
  @article{Liaw_2025,
   title={Learning Local Neighborhoods of Non-Gaussian Graphical Models},
   volume={39},
   ISSN={2159-5399},
   url={http://dx.doi.org/10.1609/aaai.v39i18.34059},
   DOI={10.1609/aaai.v39i18.34059},
   number={18},
   journal={Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence},
   publisher={Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (AAAI)},
   author={Liaw, Sarah and Morrison, Rebecca and Marzouk, Youssef and Baptista, Ricardo},
   year={2025},
   month=apr, pages={18711–18718} }
venue: "AAAI'25"
tldr: "Scalable algorithm to infer conditional independence in high-dimensional non-Gaussian graphical models."
arxiv: https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.13899
code: https://github.com/sarahliaw/lsing_sw
---

Identifying the Markov properties or conditional independencies of a collection of random variables is a fundamental task in statistics for modeling and inference. Existing approaches often learn the structure of a probabilistic graph, which encodes these dependencies, by assuming that the variables follow a distribution with a simple parametric form. Moreover, the computational cost of many algorithms scales poorly for high-dimensional distributions, as they need to estimate all the edges in the graph simultaneously. In this work, we propose a scalable algorithm to infer the conditional independence relationships of each variable by exploiting the local Markov property. The proposed method, named Localized Sparsity Identification for Non-Gaussian Distributions (L-SING), estimates the graph by using flexible classes of transport maps to represent the conditional distribution for each variable. We show that L-SING includes existing approaches, such as neighborhood selection with Lasso, as a special case. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our algorithm in both Gaussian and non-Gaussian settings by comparing it to existing methods. Lastly, we show the scalability of the proposed approach by applying it to high-dimensional non-Gaussian examples, including a biological dataset with more than 150 variables.